Welcome.
So, down below all the lights,
how many people were here for
the Project Builder session?
Just raise your hands.
Excellent, so more than half of you.
Development tools are one of the
most important aspects of building
the new operating system and
making successful applications.
And in that direction,
I want to just introduce
very rapidly Henri Lamiraux,
manager of the Interface Builders group.
And he's going to tell you all about our
world class leading Aqua UI design tool.
Thank you.
Right on the podium.
Good afternoon.
I want to start by pointing out that
today we have a wide audience here.
We have developer which started
to use Interface Builder many
years ago with Next Steps,
then Open Steps, and now with Cocoa.
We have also developer that just
starting to use Interface Builder
or are thinking about using
Cocoa and use Interface Builder.
We also have Carbon developer now
who can use Interface Builder.
So as you can see,
a wide audience of developers
with different needs,
different interests.
So when we think about that,
we decided to organize our
talk around several topics.
We want first to answer some of
the frequently asked questions,
questions that are coming over and
over on the default mailing list.
We want to show you the
new features we've added to
Interface Builder this year.
We want to give you some tips on
how to better use Interface Builder
and also give you some demos.
So this is the roadmap I'm
going to be following today.
I'm going to first introduce
quickly what is Interface Builder
and then go-- IB for short.
I'll be using the word IB sometimes
for this Interface Builder.
I will go then through the three
steps it takes to develop an
application using Interface Builder.
First,
you have to lay out your user interface.
Then you have to connect your
user interface to your code.
And then you have to load the user
interface in your application.
I'm going to go through
some tips and tricks,
talk about and talk about
our update schedule.
So let's start with what
is Interface Builder.
Interface Builder is Apple's
user interface builder tool.
We have one tool at Apple that
covers all of our frameworks.
This is Interface Builder.
Interface Builder has been tuned
to create Aqua compliant user
interfaces for both Cocoa and Carbon.
And although Interface Builder
originally was a Cocoa tool,
we now support Carbon as
a first class citizen.
Both Cocoa and Carbon are fully
supported by Interface Builder.
We're spending as much time on both
frameworks to support both frameworks.
So Interface Builder,
it's a Cocoa application
running on Mac OS X.
With Interface Builder you
create what we call Nib files.
Interface Builder does not generate code.
We don't generate Objective
C code or Java code.
We generate what you call a
Nib file that contains the
description of your user interface.
I show here two different Nib files,
a Cocoa Nib file and a Carbon Nib file.
Although they have the
same structure internally,
they are quite different and you cannot
use a Cocoa Nib in a Carbon application
or a Carbon Nib in a Cocoa application.
A Cocoa Nib is archive objects,
archive Cocoa objects.
It can be the app kit objects or
it can be also your own objects.
So it's an archive of objects.
The Carbon Nib is more of a
description of your user interface.
Carbon is not an object
oriented framework.
So the Carbon NIPs are more of a
template for your user interface.
Also I want to point out
that in a Cocoa Nib you have
more than simply objects.
You also have the connection
between those objects.
How those objects interact
between each other.
As you can see the Cocoa Nib and
Carbon Nib are a little bit different.
Also the Carbon NIPs are
XML based while the Cocoa NIPs
are still using a binary format.
So from a Cocoa nib,
you can create a Cocoa application
either in Objective-C or in Java.
Because we don't generate code,
the language you use to
develop your application,
I won't say we don't care,
but it's not important for us.
You can also create a Java client
web object application,
and there are several sessions this
week that show you how to use Interface
Builder for using web objects.
With the Carbon Nib you can create
a Carbon application and you can
target both Mac OS X and Mac OS 9.
The code that allows us to read
a Nib file and recreate your
user interface is available
in both Mac OS X and Mac OS 9.
I should have said 8 and 9 because
in fact we support also 8 and 6.
So you can target both platforms.
You have to do your development on 10
but you can target both environments.
So let's start with how
do we-- the building tool,
the thing you want to do first to be
able to layout your user interface.
You want to put button in a window,
you want to edit your menus,
and things like that.
So how do you do that?
We have a wide variety
of layout facilities.
And the first one I want to talk
about is what we call guides.
If you use the interface
builder several years ago,
there was a feature called the grid.
And we discovered that
it was not working very,
very well.
And it was not working
very well also with Aqua,
because it was hard to align
object with Aqua on the grid.
So we replaced the grid by
something we call guides.
We think it's a much faster way
to align object-- much faster and
intuitive way to align objects.
And we have two types of guides.
We have what we call the Aqua guides,
and what we call the user guides.
So let's start with the Aqua guides.
The Aqua guides implement
the Aqua layout guidelines.
That means that this is a way for you
to be sure that you are putting your
UI at the right place in your window.
So in picture number one here,
I am putting a button-- I'm
dragging a button inside the window.
And as I move this button close
to the edge of the window,
lines will show up and show
you what is the right distance
for this button to this window.
You can put it anywhere you want,
but this is we show you where it would
be the best place for this button.
And as you move closer to those guides,
the button will snap to those lines.
In picture number two,
I'm moving a second button
close to the first button.
And same thing,
we tell you what is the right
distance between the second
button and the first button.
The user guides are similar
to the Aqua guides except that
you can do whatever you want.
You can put them anywhere
you want in a window.
You have vertical guides,
horizontal guides.
You can put as many as you want.
You define them.
They are saved with a nib file so
the next time you open the nib,
those guides will be loaded.
And something here,
when you move an object,
a UI element close to those lines,
they will snap to those guides.
This is useful, for example,
to create templates.
You want all your different dialogues
to look the same and you want to be
able to put guides there to have a
way to have your UI looking the same.
Then we have what we call layout track,
which is not a Cocoa nor a Carbon notion.
It is a pure IB notion.
There is a difference
between Cocoa and Carbon,
how they are drawing UI elements.
On the Cocoa,
everything is drawn inside the frame.
The shadow of the Aqua buttons, etc.
are drawn inside the frame.
On the Carbon side,
the shadow is sometimes drawn outside
of the control bounds of the control.
The Aqua guidelines
give you some numbers,
saying a button should be 20 pixels high.
The layout track matches
those Aqua guidelines.
It is a visual bounding box of an object.
You can turn them on and
off by using command L.
In this image,
it draws those red borders around
your object and also shows you the
baseline if your object has text.
This is very handy to see where
a control hangs because of the
anti-aliasing of Aqua and the shadow.
So sometimes it's hard to figure
out where your control really ends.
We have also distance measurement.
This is a way to measure distance
between two objects or between
an object and its container.
So the way you do use distance
measurement is by selecting an object.
And as you press the Option key,
and as you move your
mouse above other objects,
we show you those lines with a distance.
Very handy feature to figure
out what is the distance between
two buttons or things like that.
We have also a full layout
menu with plenty of options.
Usually those menu items
act on a group of objects.
So you can align all the edge of the left
edge of those objects or the right edges.
You can make colors.
You can make rows.
You can change the ordering of objects,
send them to the back,
move them to the front.
Very similar to a program.
And also you can make objects
the same size or make them fit
to the content of this object.
So different options there.
We have an alignment panel which has
some of the same functionalities as
the layout menu plus some other ones,
just a different way to
present those options.
We also have... Can you change the clock?
It's still 75.
Thank you.
I won't stay here all day long.
We also have a test mode,
which is not really a layout facility,
but it's a way to see your application
like it would be at runtime.
I'm sure you've all seen the
demonstration during the keynote Monday,
where we were able to build a full
iMovie-like application and run it
inside Interface Builder without
really using PBE or compiling anything.
Just bringing your code inside
Interface Builder and be able
to create a full application and
test it within Interface Builder.
Test mode will work for
both Cocoa and Carbon.
Containers.
So Interface Builder enforce
the notion of a view hierarchy.
Cocoa has a notion of a view,
the building block of the user interface.
And view, as a super view,
we can have sub views.
In the original toolbox, Mac toolbox,
there was no notion of embedding
except a button was inside the window,
but that was it,
there was no notion of embedding.
With Carbon now, we have also embedding,
an object can be embedded
into a group box.
And Interface Builder maintains
this hierarchy of UI elements.
So if you have a group box and you want
to put a button inside this group box,
you have to put it really inside the box,
not just on top of the box.
And to do that,
right now you have to double
click on the group box,
and you get this ring around
the group box that says,
the editor on this group box is open.
And now you can drag the object inside.
And as you move the box,
everything inside the box
will move along with your box.
Also, we do clipping correctly
and everything like that.
So this is a very important
notion if you are using tab view,
group box, you need to open the editor
before you can drag something
inside those containers.
So I have to bring Scott Herz on stage.
He's going to show you some
of the layout facilities.
OK.
My on.
So the first thing I'm going to do is
I'm going to give just a tiny little tour
of IB since I have a feeling a few of
you haven't even opened the application.
This is our starting point dialogue.
You can see that you can make
Cocoa applications and you can
also make Carbon applications.
I'm going to go ahead
and make a Cocoa one,
although everything I'm going to
show applies to Carbon as well.
This is our design window.
You can drag widgets from our
palette over here onto it.
And then you can change their attributes,
their size, their connections,
all kinds of things using this inspector
palette over here or info palette,
sorry.
We have a document window here which
contains our top level objects.
We have a window and a main menu.
And then there's also the files
owner and first responder for
Cocoa which we'll talk about later.
So now let's talk a little bit about some
of the new layout facilities we have.
I'm going to go over it pretty quick
since Henri covered it fairly well.
I'm going to drag a button out and
these little blue lines appear and
it'll snap to where the human interface
guidelines say that button should,
where that button should be.
I don't know if anybody saw,
there was an AquaTalk earlier
or if it's going to be.
There's this great slide where there's
this dialogue all laid out and there's
something like 40 little numbers of
where everything should be lined up.
And when they came to us with
those guidelines we were pretty
spooked by the whole thing.
So what we did is we compiled all those
numbers into the application so it knows,
for example,
and I'm going to show the measurement
lines by holding the option key down,
that a button should be 20 pixels from
the right and 20 pixels from the bottom.
So now I'll drag another one out and
just like Henri showed in his slides,
it'll snap and it knows that
it's 12 pixels from here and then
also 20 pixels from the bottom.
An interesting note with
the measurement lines,
if I hold the option key down,
over the selected button,
it shows which guides are selected.
So that's the first thing
that I wanted to show you.
And then the second thing
that I wanted to show you is
that the measurement lines,
if I hold the option key down
over the selected button,
it shows which guides are selected.
Apply to that widget.
So we do more than that.
We know how to do like tabs.
Like for example,
tabs can be all the way to the left
or they can be over a little bit.
We'll drag that down here.
They know how far they
should be above a button,
which is completely different than
how far a button should be from,
say, a pop-up button.
I'm going to double click
on this to open the editor.
And Henri mentioned that you
have to do that for containment.
I'm happy to say that
in a future version,
this nonsense is all gone and you
won't have to worry about that.
And it'll work as it
should have 11 years ago.
So I'll drag this out.
One thing that we do is indention.
This is really great for
preferences dialogs and things
like that where you have a header,
then you have a lot of check boxes below.
I'll drag out a radio button group.
And as you can see,
it knows that it should
automatically align down there.
I'll switch the tabs.
I'm going to bring out a button.
And I'll make a matrix of buttons
by holding down the Option key,
something we hear asked a lot.
How do I make a matrix?
Well, you hold the Option key
down and you just grow it.
I'm going to turn on the layout
rectangles and you can see here if
I make this a little bit longer,
[Transcript missing]
So we've seen how to layout your user
interface and all the facilities we
have in Interface Builder to do that.
Now let's talk about how do you connect
your user interface to your code.
You have a button,
the user clicks on the button,
you want something to happen.
So,
in the layout facilities we didn't make
any distinction between Cocoa and Carbon.
They work the same way.
There is no difference as far,
except for the UI elements you
have available on the pallet.
There are no differences between
Cocoa and Carbon as far as
layout in Interface Builder.
The same features.
When you come to how to connect
your user interface to your code,
this is different.
Carbon and Cocoa are
different frameworks.
Carbon is a CPI procedural framework.
Whether Cocoa is an object oriented
framework and relies heavily on
the dynamic feature of Objective C.
So, totally different framework.
Let's start with Carbon.
The thing you have to understand
is that IB does not change the
programming model of Carbon.
If you know how to use Carbon today,
you can use Interface
Builder immediately.
We don't invent a new
way to program Carbon.
This is just a better way to
lay out your user interface and
to package your user interface.
It makes it easy to use
the Carbon event model.
We have some features in
IB that make it easier for you
to use the Carbon event model.
But you don't have to forget
the Carbon API is the same API.
There are two things you may
want to do as a Carbon developer.
You may want to get a
reference on the UI element.
And you want maybe also to get a
pointer on the button or a text field.
And you want also to
react to some user action.
So let's first talk about getting
a reference to a UI element.
So what do you do in Interface Builder?
You build your user interface.
You bring one of those info window.
And you can just assign control
ID to controls or menu IDs to menu
like you would do anywhere else.
And in your code,
call the appropriate API,
the appropriate Carbon API,
to get a reference to your control
by calling getControlById or to a
menu by calling getMenuReference,
getMenuRef, or et cetera.
So nothing very unusual.
To react to a user action,
Carbon has this notion
of a command ID now.
You can assign a command
ID to some UI elements,
or you can assign a command ID to
a menu item or to a control.
And in your code,
implement the event handler
to process those commands.
There is a talk right after this
one about the event manager.
And if you want to learn
more about the event manager,
stick around.
So as you see, nothing very unusual,
just a new way to lay out your
user interface and set up your
user interface so you can connect
your user interface to your code.
So I'll bring back Scott on stage
to show you some of those features.
Did you miss me?
Good.
OK.
So I'm going to go back to
our starting point dialogue.
And this time I'm going to
create a Carbon application.
I'm not going to show you so much,
not really going to show you any code.
We'll let the Carbon folks
do that in the next session.
But I want to give you sort of a tour
of when they talk about the control
ID and where to put your HI commands,
I want to show you where those
are in Interface Builder.
Once again, we have the same.
We have a design window.
We have a palette.
All of your favorite Carbon widgets
are represented here.
So I'm going to drag out a button.
And as you can see,
the guides work in Carbon just
as well as they work in Cocoa.
I'm going to bring up the inspector here.
And I'm going to switch
to the Control pane.
And here's the signature that
you would use by something
like in Get Control by ID.
You fill out the little struct.
You're going to type something in there.
And you're going to remember it.
And you're going to
put it in that struct.
And here's the HI command.
So you've seen us do in
demos past where we put quit.
And it's automatically been sent to
the nearest handler that listens to it.
So what you would probably do is
you would put some sort of command
of your own working in there.
And you'd listen to it in a window
controller or something like that.
That's all I have to show for that one.
It's a quickie.
So, a quick demo on Carbon.
As I said, there is a talk right here,
right after this talk about
Carbon Event Manager and you'll
be able to learn more about how
to use the Carbon Event Manager.
Cocoa now.
There are four important
Cocoa ID concepts that you
need to understand to be
able to use IB and Cocoa.
Those four notions are
the notion of outlet,
target action, file donor,
and first responder.
Those are very important to understand
because you have to use them.
You can't just say, "Oh,
I'm going to skip file donor.
I don't want to know about this one."
You have to understand all of them.
So let's start.
So an outlet.
An outlet is an instance variable
that points to another object.
It's just an instance variable.
Just another fancy word
for an instance variable.
To point to another object,
that means that an outlet
cannot be an int or a float.
It has to be a pointer to another object.
Why do we call them an outlet?
Because this is a special
instance variable that you are
not setting this value by code,
by writing code.
You're setting this value
of this instance variable
within Interface Builder.
By making a connection between
an instance variable of a
class and some other object,
you can set the value of this outlet.
So here I have a class foo that
has two instance variables,
a window and a button.
And I can, in Interface Builder,
set the value of this object
within Interface Builder
without writing any code.
So at one time,
this object will have those values there.
Target and action.
Target is an object responsible
for responding to a user's action.
Just an object.
The action is a method in this object
that specifies what the object is to do.
So a lot of objects in the app
kit have two instance variables
called target and action.
NSControl and NSMenuItem have
those kind of instance variables.
Those two instance
variables are like outlets.
You can set them using Interface Builder.
The first one,
the target is a pointer to an object.
You say, when I press this button,
I want this object to do something.
And the action is,
I want to execute this piece of code.
So in this case,
the target is a pointer to this object.
And the action is a method within
this object that's going to do
something when you press the button.
So the actions have a specific pattern.
They do something with one parameter,
which is a sender.
In this case,
the sender will be the button itself.
So as I say,
what is the role of Interface Builder
regarding outlets and target action?
It's to graphically connect those outlets
and those target actions together.
All those connections are saved in a
Nib file along with all your objects.
And at runtime, all those connections
are put back together,
like if you were doing it by program,
except you don't do any programming here.
Outlets are set.
Control, menu item are ready to
trigger the appropriated code.
This is what outlet action
and target actions are.
Now, FileZoner and First Responder,
the two big ones.
If you look at a document
window of Interface Builder,
you see all those icons.
And there are two
important icons in there,
which are the file owner
and the first responder.
And their name is grayed out because you
can't change the name of those objects.
But those are not real objects in a Nib.
They are just proxy objects.
They are standing from some other
object that are outside of the Nib file.
Those objects are not instantiated
with all the other objects
that you have in your Nib file.
In a Nib file you have a window,
you have a menu, etc.
Those objects are coming back
to life when you load the Nib.
But those two objects are not.
They already exist before you
started to load the Nib file.
So they are just proxy objects.
The file owner, as I said,
is an existing object.
It's external to the Nib file.
There is already an instance of this
object somewhere in your application
even before the Nib was loaded.
And you're passing this object to the
call that allows us to load the Nib file.
In this case we are using loadNibName,
passing the name of the Nib
and passing this file's owner.
What's the role of this file owner?
Its role is to channel messages
between objects that are unarchived
from the Nib and objects that
are outside your application.
Imagine your Nib has a little
bubble of objects and if there was
no file owner there would be no way
to reach what's inside this bubble.
You need some way to reach inside the
Nib file when the Nib file is loaded
and this object is the file owner.
First responder is also a proxy object.
It's not instantiated in your Nib file.
The first object,
the first responder is more of a status
given to an object than a real object.
The definition is that it's the
first object in the responder
chain to respond to a message.
As I say,
the files owner was a real object.
The first responder is what is
different object depending on the
situation of your application,
where your application is,
what you have been doing
with your application.
So let's also explain what
a responder chain is first.
confused here.
So let's explain first what
the responder chain is.
So I have a responder chain here
which is not completely right.
It's just for an example.
It's a lot of missing objects
in this responder chain,
but it's just to show
you how things work.
So I have an application.
I have this application has one window,
and inside this window I have a control,
which here is a text field,
and the user is typing
in this text field.
As the user types in the text field,
he pulls down the menu
and shows hide window.
So the hide window menu item was
connected to the first responder.
So the hide window message is sent,
and it goes to the object
that currently has the focus,
which is the text field.
The text field knows
nothing about hide window,
so it says--it passes
to the next responder,
which is the window.
And the window says, yes,
I know how to hide my window,
so hide the window.
So by connecting to the first responder,
you're connecting to whatever object
that are currently in the responder
chain that can answer this message.
This is a very useful concept.
The first responder is useful
to connect an action to an
unspecified instance of a target.
You have 10 text fields in a window.
You don't want to connect your cut, copy,
paste menu item to every
text field in your window.
You just want to say,
connect it to whatever text
field has currently the focus.
And you connect it to
the first responder.
You can also use the first responder
to connect an object to an object
outside of your Nib file as long as
this object is inside the target chain.
We do use that for example for
NS application which is never in a Nib,
but you may want sometimes to
connect a menu item to some
action in your application.
A good way to do that might be to
use the first responder to connect
your menu item to the first responder
and the application will get this
message if nobody else is getting it.
So now I bring Scott Herz back
on stage to the big demo.
This one's hard.
So the first thing I'm going to do is
show you the application that we're
going to build to demonstrate how to
add an action to first responder and
how to connect your interface to it.
We're going to do it with
this little application here.
If you look on the window on the right,
it's the front most window,
which means that you could
consider it to be the lowest
object in the responder chain.
So when I say toggle picture--
There's a message that we're going to,
well there's an action rather,
that we're going to
add to first responder.
[Transcript missing]
There's a little bit of
code that you need to see.
This is our NS application subclass.
All it's going to do is it's
going to create two of our
toggle controller classes.
And those toggle controller classes
are what create the window and handle
messages that come to in front of it.
So this is the header for
the toggle controller.
There's two things
I want you to see here.
We declare an outlet to
what's going to be an NS image
view called Picture Outlet.
This header file also implements our
action called toggle picture action,
or toggle picture.
We have these two little blurbs
here called IB outlet and IB action
which actually sort of null out.
They don't really do anything,
but what that allows IB to do is look
through your header and parse those,
these outlets and actions in.
We have two nibs, we have a main menu,
and we have a toggle window.
So let's first take a look at our window.
You saw this earlier.
There's no picture in it right now
because the code actually puts that in.
What we want to do is we want
to hook this window up to
our toggle controller code.
Before we can do that,
we have to tell the nib
what is a toggle controller.
So we go to the classes pane here.
We go to the classes menu
and we say read files.
And what we can do is we
can find our header file.
So here it is, toggle controller.
And we can parse it.
And if you look down here, it's realized,
oh, here's toggle controller.
Not only that,
but it's an NSWindowController.
It's already figured out from the
header what type of subclass it is.
I'm going to click the
little actions dealie here.
And we can see that it's
found our picture outlet.
It's also found the window outlet
that comes from NSWindowController.
And it's also found our toggle
picture action and then another
action show window that's also
implemented by NSWindowController.
So we've told the nib, hey,
here's what a toggle controller is.
So now we need to tell the nib
that you're actually going to be
loaded by a toggle controller.
Your files owner is a toggle controller.
Right now it's just, it doesn't know,
so it's just set to NSObject.
If I scroll down,
we can actually click the toggle
controller here in the files owner
attributes pane on the inspector.
So now that we've told the Nib, hey,
FileZoner is a toggle controller,
we can go about making connections to it.
So I hold the Control key down
and I drag from Files Owner.
And the first one I'm going
to do is our picture control.
And you see how it highlights?
It's going to bring up the
connections inspector and here we go,
here's the picture outlet.
So I'll click that and
I'll click connect.
Now we need to tell,
now that we've put the
picture control up,
we've done sort of all the
connections for our toggle controller,
we need to go about and do the
ones that NSWindowController wants.
Namely, it wants to know what window
it's supposed to be controlling.
So I'll hold the control key down again,
and this time I'm going to drag
from FileZoner to the window.
So if you look right here
in the connection inspector,
click on window, click connect.
So we've hooked all of our outlets up,
but there's one thing
we haven't done yet.
We haven't inserted our toggle
controller into the responder chain.
So remember how Henri showed you
the sort of the simplistic view
of what the responder chain is?
Well, there's one more little thing.
If NSWindow can't respond to your action,
it'll try what's called its delegate.
And that's how we're going to
get into the responder chain.
We're going to set our toggle controller
to be the delegate of those windows.
And how I do that is by holding
the control key down again,
go from window to files owner,
and I can set its delegate.
And I hit connect.
So that's done.
I'm going to close that.
Now let's take a look
at our main menu nib.
I'll open this up.
So here's our main menu editor.
Here's our toggle picture command.
We want to make an action.
We want to drag an action from our
toggle picture to the first responder.
But out of the box,
Interface Builder doesn't know anything
about that action toggle picture,
so we have to tell it again.
So what we do is we go
to the classes pane,
and we go all the way to the
top where first responder lives.
Then we go up to the classes menu
and I'm going to say add action.
And I'm going to type toggle picture.
All these other ones that are in gray
are sort of convenience ones that
we know that a lot of other stuff
implements and so we put those there for
you just sort of for your convenience.
But we have to add this one because
like I said 11 years ago we had
no idea somebody was going to make
something called toggle picture.
So we have to do it.
Now that we've added that to first
responder we can drag a connection.
So once again with the control key,
drag it down to our first responder.
So we want to set the menu items
target to be toggle picture.
So I hit connect.
And if I've remembered my script,
that's all we have to do.
So I'm going to go here
and I'm going to build it.
I'll probably kill this one
just to prove that I'm doing it.
And we'll run it.
So here's our front most window.
And oops, I forgot to hook something up.
You put an uppercase T.
What's that?
You put uppercase T.
Huh?
You type toggle picture with
uppercase T in the name.
You were supposed to shout
that out when I did that.
You're not much of an audience.
Uppercase T.
Ah, there we go.
Yay.
So the only thing we don't do is
spell checking in the control--
in the connections inspector.
Thank you.
Those notions of outlets, target action,
file zone,
first responder are very important.
File zone and first responder are
difficult notions and they are
quite unusual in this environment.
They are difficult
notions but they are very,
very powerful and you can do anything
you want with those two notions.
So look at them, practice,
look at all of our code.
It's very important to understand
the notion of file zone and first
responder to really be able to
develop your Cocoa application.
You've laid out your user interface,
you've connected your code
to your user interface,
either for Carbon and Cocoa,
and now you want to load this user
interface inside your application.
So here again, there is a difference
between Cocoa and Carbon.
In Carbon, there are no objects.
So you have to explicitly load
your user interface and get
object outside of the nib.
In Cocoa, it is more or less automatic.
There is also a nib which
we call the main nib,
which is automatically loaded
when your application is launched.
And also a nib can be loaded on demand.
So let me go first explain about Carbon.
In Carbon there is one header,
the ibcarbon-runtime.h,
which has six functions,
a very small API.
And the six API allows you to
load a Nib file and get anything
outside of this Nib file-- windows,
menus, et cetera.
Those APIs are available on Mac OS X,
apart of the Carbon framework.
So if you're using,
you're linking against Carbon,
you're already getting
those APIs ready to use.
And on Mac OS X, Mac OS 9 and 8,
I should have said 8 also,
we are part of Carbon Nib since 1.1.
So you can use Nib file and
you can use the same API,
the same code to load
your Nib file on 8 or 9.
So here I have a typical,
very small application,
Carbon application,
that by the way will run perfectly well.
And what I'm doing here is that I'm
first getting a reference to a Nib file.
I call create Nib reference,
passing the name of the Nib file,
and I get back a Nib reference.
I can then ask for the menu
bar inside this Nib file,
and it happens I call my
menu bar in my Nib file.
So I can say,
set the main menu bar using the
menu bar that's inside this Nib.
I can also then create a
window from the Nib file,
same thing, passing a Nib reference,
passing the name of the
window you want to extract,
and you get a window reference.
I immediately dispose the Nib reference.
You should not keep those
Nib reference around because
we are loading some XML file,
etc.
You want to get rid of them
as soon as you are done.
The window was created invisible,
so now you just say show window
and the window pops on the screen.
And you can go and run,
go and call run application event loop,
and you're done.
And this application will run fine,
providing a Nib that has those
two objects that will put a menu
bar and a window on the screen.
Cocoa.
So for Cocoa,
there is one special Nib file,
which we call the main Nib file.
This Nib file is automatically
loaded at launch time.
When you launch a Cocoa application,
the main Nib file is
automatically loaded.
The name doesn't have to be main.
It can be anything you want.
You can go in the Project Builder,
Application Settings tab,
and you can change the name
of this Nib the way you want.
Usually, this Nib file should
contain the menu bar,
at least the menu bar,
because this is the UI that you
want to come up immediately when
you launch your application.
So a good place for your menu
bar is inside the main Nib.
The file owner of this main
Nib will be the application object,
because the application
is loading this Nib file.
So this is a good place, for example,
if you want to connect some menu item
to the application-- for example,
you have implemented some
code in your application,
and you want to connect menu item to
your application-- you can define those
target actions on your application.
You can also do some
action on your file owner,
which is the application,
and connect your menu
item to the file owner,
because the file owner
is the application.
Other Nib files should be loaded lazily.
You can explicitly load a
Nib file using NSBundle,
loadNIPName, owner.
We have also some other
API to load Nib file,
but this is the one that's the most used.
You can also use NSWindowController.
It's a class that you should
try to use whenever possible.
If you use a window controller,
the window controller is
created outside of the Nib,
and the file owner of this
Nib will be the window controller.
We've just added a new sample in
the CD you got at the conference
called Simple MultiWindow.
It's a Cocoa sample that shows you how
to create an application with multiple
Nib and how to use window controller.
So now I would like to go and
cover some tips and tricks,
some things that you need to
know about Interface Builder that
will make your life much easier.
And ours too.
So let's go through some
tips and tricks here.
First, an important one.
Do not put all your UI in one big,
giant nib.
This is not the way a
nib file should be used.
This is very important,
especially for Carbon developer,
which are used to a resource
fork with a bunch of DLOG,
DITL, all the applications in one big,
huge resource fork.
Nib files are not resource files
and should not be used like
you used to use resource files.
You should break up your UI in
as many nibs as possible.
Because when you load a nib file,
in Cocoa, when you load a nib file,
all the objects in the nib file
will be loaded automatically.
All windows will be instantiated.
Everything will be loaded at once.
On the Carbon side, there are no objects,
but still we'll be loading a lot of
extra XML just for you to get one window.
So if you break up your
UI in multiple nibs,
your nib will load faster.
And also, it will facilitate reuse.
If you have this nice about box you
want to reuse in another application,
it's much easier to just copy your
nib file and your source code.
And bring it to the other application
instead of trying to extract your window,
your controller, et cetera.
So break up your UI in multiple nibs.
As an example,
here I have a Carbon application,
a bad Carbon application,
which has four windows and a menu bar.
This application has a menu bar,
a main window, an about box,
a connection panel,
and some preference panel.
This is bad.
This is not the way you should do it.
What you should do is have, in this case,
four nibs.
One with your main window and your
main menu because in this case this
is a single window type of application
with one window and a menu bar.
So you put your window and your
menu bar into your main nib.
You load this UI when you
launch your application.
Then you need to have a
nib with your about box,
a nib with your connection panel,
and a nib with your preferences.
If the user never uses your
preference or your about box,
there is no need to load this nib file.
Top level objects.
You get something to drink.
Couple of objects.
This is specific for Cocoa.
In a Nib file, you have this document
window with a bunch of icons.
We talked about the first,
the file owner and the first responder,
which are not real objects,
they are just proxy objects for objects
that are outside of the Nib file.
But here,
I highlighted three objects.
There is a menu bar, a window,
and a controller object.
This is for Cocoa.
Carbon, I don't have to worry about
top level objects too much.
So, typically this is what you used to
have in a Nib file traditionally.
You used to have a controller,
windows and menu.
[Transcript missing]
So, new type of top level objects
and I will talk more about
the view in a few minutes.
So I'm talking about those top level
objects because of ref counting.
You know that Cocoa used
reference counting,
so an object is created,
if you call alloc init,
your ref count is one.
Creating an object in a Nib file
is exactly like calling alloc init.
If you instantiate a
window inside a Nib file,
it's like in your code calling NSWindow,
alloc init, whatever,
plus extra parameters.
So this is really creating an object,
and you get an object
with a ref count of one,
which means that if
you don't do anything,
you have a leak because you're
loading a Nib file and suddenly
this Nib file is not needed anymore.
Those objects are still there.
Someone asked to release those objects.
So the role of the--who
should release those objects
is usually the file's owner.
The way to do that, for example,
would be to have an outlet
inside your file owner that will
connect to a window or connect to
another object inside your Nib.
And when the controller decides, "Oh,
I'm going to do this," the file owner
decides that this Nib is not needed,
it will release those objects.
This is very, very important.
There's one exception.
NSWindow has this little
flag called Release on Close,
which means when I'm close,
get rid of myself.
So it just releases itself.
So an NSWindow,
you don't have to worry about
that because if you set this flag,
Release on Close,
it will go away automatically.
For all other objects,
you have to be very careful that
someone has to own this object,
someone has to have an
outlet on this object,
and knows how to release it when
you're done with the Nib file.
So, windowless view.
This is new in Interface Builder.
It's a very, very useful feature.
It allows you to create a view
without an enclosing window.
To do that,
you simply drag a custom view.
We have a custom object on the palette.
You just simply drag a custom
view inside your document window
and you instantiate an NSView.
You can then change the
class of this NSView.
It can be MyView, whatever.
This eliminates the
need to create a window.
A couple of years ago,
what you had to do is
create a window at runtime,
have an outlet on this window,
Get a pointer to the content
view and get rid of the window.
So you have to write a little
bit of code to just get a view
by itself without a window.
You don't have to do that anymore now.
You can just create a view.
You can put control inside
this view and you can just
instantiate this view by itself.
Which makes me think also that
there's something that's important,
a new feature in Interface Builder
for people who use Cocoa for a while.
You can also now embed
control in a custom view.
It's something you could not do before.
You can only embed things into a
group box or something like that.
You can use now a custom
view as a container.
So we use this windowless view as
the content view of an NS drawer.
This is one of the usage
we have of windowless view.
But you can use windowless
view for anything you want.
Be very careful with
the ref counting again.
This view is going to be created.
If you have an outlet with this view and
you put this view inside another view,
now the ref count is two.
This content view goes away.
The ref count of your view is still one.
So it's not going away.
You have to be careful of
the reference counting.
We have the windowless view in
Carbon and we bring that to Cocoa.
No, sorry,
we have that in Cocoa and bring that
in Carbon where we'll be able to
create a user pane without a view
and be able to manipulate this user
pane and put it wherever you want.
So that's a feature for Carbon.
Post-Nib loading initialization.
I think that's one of the
questions that come up more
often on different mailing lists.
I have this object in a nib and
I override init with frame and
my init with frame is not called.
Why?
Because the rule here is do not rely,
don't rely on init,
init twist frame or init twist
coder to do any post loading,
post nib loading initialization.
The way to do that is to
implement AwakeFromNib.
Any object can implement AwakeFromNib
and when we load a nib file,
when we instantiate all those objects,
the last thing we do is
that we ask every object,
do you implement AwakeFromNib?
If the object says yes,
we call AwakeFromNib.
This is the last thing we do.
So at this point,
all objects have been instantiated.
Everything in your nib
has been instantiated.
All the outlet target
actions have been set.
So all the objects are ready to go.
So never try to override init,
init twist frame or init twist coder to
do any post nib loading initialization.
Implement AwakeFromNib.
This is the right place to do that.
Nib tool.
NibTool is a handy little tool.
It's a command line tool that we
have that allows you to manipulate
the content of a Nib file
without using Interface Builder.
It's a command line tool.
It works for both Cocoa and Carbon,
so you can both accept
Cocoa and Carbon nibs.
And there are a lot of options.
We just added a ManPage to NibTool,
so you have all the
options using ManPage.
It's used by FileMerge to diff to nibs.
Cocoa nibs are a binary,
so FileMerge cannot show
you the difference between
what changes on Nib files.
So what FileMerge does is that it
invokes NibTool on those two nibs,
asking NibTool to convert those two
nibs into a textual representation.
And then you can do a diff
of those two Nib files.
We've added--
A feature recently to allow localization
of a Nib file using Nib tool.
Let's say that you have an
English nib and you want to
translate it into a French nib.
One way to do that would be to open
your English nib into Interface
Builder and have someone figuring
out where are all the strings,
trying to find where the strings are
so you can localize those strings.
There is a new way to do that now.
What you can do is you can use
Nib tool and ask Nib tool to extract
all the strings from this Nib file.
So the output of Nib tool will be a text
file that looks like hello equal hello,
close equal close, open equal open.
So it's a way to extract all
the strings from this Nib tool.
You can then send this text file to
a localizer and ask him to translate
the right side of the string,
of the equal sign.
And when you get back
your text file localized,
you can send it back to Nib tool
using the original English Nib file
and create a French Nib.
IB will know where to put back
those strings in the right place.
So you may have to go back and still open
the Nib file and readjust some button,
would be too short or too long,
but you can make the localization
a lot more automatic.
And in fact,
this is one way we're doing that
at Apple to localize Nib files.
We have a process which is a bit
more complex than this one that use
Nib tool to localize automatically
all the Nib file without any
intervention of engineers.
So there is a session Thursday on
how to localize your application.
And if you're interested to look at that,
go to this session.
[Transcript missing]
In the box that came with Mac OS X,
there was a developer CD.
And on this CD there was
Interface Builder version 2.0.
I think IB was version 1.0 for 15 years,
so we decided it was a
good time to go to 2.0.
So this is version 2.0.
We know our shipping version
2.0.1 at the conference.
And it's many bug fixing.
We have some bugs fixed for web objects.
There's many bug fixes.
There are no new features there.
But we've added two new examples.
We have an example called Busy
Palette and Simple Multi Window.
These are both Cocoa examples.
The Busy Palette is--there's
been a lot of demand recently for
people wanting to write palettes.
And we haven't talked about that today,
but this sample is a complete
palette example that shows you
how to support undo in your object
when you're writing a palette,
to show you how to write inspectors,
show you how to write multiple
modes for the inspector,
for example.
When you drag a formatter
on the text field,
you get another inspector.
So how to add inspector
to the inspector window.
That's what says the info window.
But this is a full complete
palette sample that I'm sure a
lot of you will find very useful.
There's also a
Simple Multi Window example,
which I took before,
showing you how to write an
application with multiple windows
using an S Window Controller.
Interface Builder will be released
using the quarterly developer update.
So as we have new features
and new bug fixes,
you will see a new
version of IB coming out.
I just want to talk briefly
about what's coming up,
what new features we have
scheduled for Interface Builder.
First we want to continue to concentrate
on the stability of the product.
We want to make it faster, stable,
easier to use.
As far as easier to use,
and Scott was talking about that,
we got a lot of feedback about
how you edit those containers.
You have to double
click all these things.
So we are changing that.
You'll find a much better,
more intuitive way to edit containers.
You won't have to double
click all these things.
It will be much more natural.
We're also changing the UI to
define outlet and action.
I think a better UI to define
those outlet and actions.
For people who are familiar
with Interface Builder,
on Cocoa there is a class tab and
right now it shows an outline view.
We are also giving you the
choice to use a browser view,
which is much easier to navigate,
and also give you a search feature
so you can type NSV and it's
going to go to NSV automatically.
We are also adding flagging of
unconnected outlet and actions,
the target actions.
This is very useful because sometimes
if you have a very complex user
interface and you have a lot of menus,
items, a lot of questions,
you may miss a connection and
sometimes you don't understand
why your application doesn't work.
So now we will be showing you what is
not connected in Interface Builder.
For example,
it's very important that if you
have an S-Window controller that
the window outlet be correctly
connected to the window.
So if you don't do that,
your application may not work.
So we will be flagging those
unconnected outlets and actions.
We want to continue to
improve PB and IB integration.
We want to take advantage of the indexer.
We want to make sure that we
have a good indexer in PB.
So this is something important
we have to be able to use.
And also we are continuing to closely
track Cocoa and Carbon frameworks.
Cocoa and Carbon are adding new features,
new UI elements,
and we want to have IB to
always be on top of that,
always be ready for you to use those
new UIs in both Cocoa and Carbon.
So we are working,
in fact we are part of the
Cocoa and Carbon teams,
and we are very closely what changes
are made to those two frameworks
to renew the latest user interface.
And we have a lot more EIDs and
features coming up pretty soon.
I'd like to bring back Godfrey
on stage and I went very,
very fast today.
So we have time for .
Thank you very much,
Henri.
Pretty amazing stuff.
The use of Interface Builder for
Carbon and Cocoa really ensures much,
much better Aqua user interfaces.
It's an essential part of the
Cocoa development and really
helps you use your Carbon events
to the greatest effect.
On the screen right now,
information resources.
Again, our information pages
for all Mac OS X tools.
The project,
somebody copy and pasted the wrong,
that should be the Interface
Builder web page there.
And below that,
the master mailing list page
for all the different mailing
lists that we support at Apple.
There's Project Builder users,
there's Cocoa dev,
there's also Carbon dev
and the web objects lists,
all of which will be
using Interface Builder.
A roadmap for more sessions.
Carbon event manager,
right here after this session.
Tomorrow, using Cocoa.
Actually, Thursday, using Cocoa and the
advanced Cocoa topics.
And the Mac OS X application
localization.
And now,
if I can have the house lights up,
people can start coming up to the
microphones to ask their questions.
This is my contact information
if you have strategic questions
regarding tools of any sort.
I am your technology
manager to deal with those.
And also for feedback to
the Mac OS X tools groups,
we have a mailing list direct,
a mailing address
specifically for that purpose.